docs: FIP draft — testing & acceptance criteria for onboarding new validators (#910)
farcasterxyz/snapchain: docs/proposals/fip-validator-onboarding-testing.md

Reviewer: @manan19 isn't this title still off? "FIP: Testing & Acceptance Criteria for Onboarding New Snapchain Validators"

from what you said yesterday:
- acceptance criteria will be separate FIP
- this is not just for snapchain validators

Reviewer: also has a section header for "Acceptance checklist (go / no-go)" at the bottom

# FIP: Testing & Acceptance Criteria for Onboarding New Snapchain Validators

> **Note:** This document is written in the snapchain repo for review, but is intended to be posted
> as an RFC / discussion in [farcasterxyz/protocol Discussions](https://github.com/farcasterxyz/protocol/discussions).
> Code references below point at the snapchain repository.

| Field | Value |
|-------|-------|
| **Title** | Testing & Acceptance Criteria for Onboarding New Snapchain Validators |
| **Status** | Draft |
| **Author** | Neynar (manan@neynar.com) |
| **Created** | 2026-06-09 |
| **Discussion** | TBD |

---

## Summary

Snapchain consensus is Byzantine-fault-tolerant (Malachite BFT) with **equal voting power per
validator** and a **2/3+ quorum** to commit. Adding a validator is a one-line change — appending a

> `[[consensus.validator_sets]]` entry to [`validators.toml`](../../validators.toml) at a future

Reviewer 2: all these relative paths will have to change to URLs before sharing in the discussion forum

Author: Acknowledged — the relative paths are correct/clickable in-repo, so I left them for the PR version and will convert them to absolute `github.com/.../blob/main/...` URLs when generating the version to paste into the discussion forum.

## Specification

### Risk tiers (the spine of this proposal)

Every failure mode and test below is tagged by the lowest tier it applies to. **Tiers are
cumulative** — Tier C must pass everything required for A and B as well.

| Tier | Candidate | Dominant risk | Required because |
|------|-----------|---------------|------------------|
| **A** | Stock snapchain, **new operator / new geo-DC** | Networking, latency, key custody, ops | Same binary ⇒ determinism is a given; the network path and operator are new. |
| **B** | **Fork** of snapchain (custom patches, dep drift) | Divergence in encoding / validation / config vs upstream | Code differs ⇒ subtle determinism drift possible; everything in A still applies. |
| **C** | **Independent reimplementation** (from-scratch consensus client) | Full byte-for-byte determinism | Nothing shared ⇒ protobuf bytes, hashes, signatures, validation rules, and state roots must all match exactly; everything in A and B still applies. |

### How a validator participates (background, grounded in the code)

A reviewer should understand these mechanisms, because the test criteria map directly onto them.

> - **Consensus:** Malachite BFT (CometBFT/Tendermint-style), pinned to a specific git ref in CI

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Consensus:** Malachite BFT (CometBFT/Tendermint-style), pinned to a specific git ref
```

Author: Done in f52ee60 — dropped "in CI" and removed the `verify-impl.yml` reference; the line now just says pinned to a specific git ref with engine crates in `Cargo.toml`.

  ([`.github/workflows/verify-impl.yml`](../../.github/workflows/verify-impl.yml)); engine crates in
  [`Cargo.toml`](../../Cargo.toml). Flow per height: **propose → prevote → precommit → commit**, with

>   2/3+ voting power required at each gate. Round timeouts grow by `step_delta` each round.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  >2/3 voting power required for a round to proceed. Round timeouts grow by `step_delta` each round.
```

Author: Applied in f52ee60.

  - ~0 extra rounds at steady state (no chronic timeouts);
  - p50/p99 commit latency within budget;
  - **zero signature/hash rejections** attributable to the candidate;
  - the candidate **proposes and is voted in** during its proposer slots;
  - survives a **rolling restart** and a **simulated cross-DC partition** with correct recovery.

### Geo / datacenter-specific tests *(new validator in a different geo — all tiers)*

These target N1–N6 and O3 specifically:

- Measure **real RTT** from the new DC to *each* existing validator; verify it fits within the
  `propose_time` / `prevote_time` budget **with margin**; document headroom and whether timing
  params need revisiting (and that changing timing is itself a coordinated, all-node change).
- **Soak test** for ≥ several days on testnet **from the real DC** to catch diurnal latency/jitter,
  transient packet loss, and mesh re-formation under churn.
- **Partition/failover drills** from the new DC (reuse `partition_validators` / `heal_partition`).
- **Clock-sync (NTP)** verification across DCs.
- Confirm **bootstrap/direct-peer lists** and **firewall/QUIC reachability** from the new network
  path.

## Rollout

> Staged, reversible, one shard at a time:

Reviewer 2: this "one shard at a time" language is less than ideal. There is instability across shards if there is delay between each shard's cutover. Ideally the cutover would happen across all shards around the same time but it's hard to estimate target block heights across all shards

Author: Good catch — fixed in f52ee60. Replaced "one shard at a time" with cutting the validator into all shards at around the same time, and called out the real constraint (per-shard `effective_at` heights advancing independently makes a near-simultaneous cutover hard to estimate). I had mistaken the staggered rollout in `validators.toml` for the intended approach rather than a practical limitation.

1. **Pass L0–L2 in CI.** No mainnet scheduling until these are green.
2. **Testnet read-node first.** Candidate joins the public testnet as a **read node** (syncs, does
   not vote). Verify it tracks tip with **zero divergence** over an observation window.
3. **Testnet validator.** Add the candidate to the **testnet** validator set via a future
   `effective_at`. Observe the L3 gates for an observation window (e.g. several days), including a
   partition drill.
4. **Mainnet, one shard at a time.** Only then schedule a **mainnet** `effective_at`, **per shard**,
   mirroring the existing staggered per-shard rollout already visible in
   [`validators.toml`](../../validators.toml) (block shard first, then message shards, with an
   observation window between each).
5. **Rollback plan.** Pre-stage a follow-up validator-set entry that **removes** the candidate, so
   recovery is a known-good config change rather than an improvised one. Document the height
   coordination, and note the **"remove is reliable, add is racy"** caveat from

>    `test_validator_set_rotation`.

Reviewer 2: any language mentioning this integration test and referencing queuing up a removal config, while theoretically sensible is not something I've ever done in practice. Also this is referencing language about issues [encountered in CI](https://github.com/farcasterxyz/snapchain/blob/d23fea39e7f580f470ca372781c0604e6ffa00ee/tests/consensus_test.rs#L2331-L2336). It's probably good to do a pass where language relying solely on issues encountered in CI is scrubbed that seems to be specific to the brittleness of an automated CI environment.

Author: Addressed in f52ee60. Dropped the pre-staged-removal-config prescription — rollback now just describes removal via the normal future-`effective_at` mechanism. Also did a pass scrubbing language anchored on CI-specific brittleness (see the L262/L267 threads).

parentheses; unmarked items apply to **all** tiers.

- [ ] **(B/C)** L0 determinism vectors: 100% byte-exact on encoding, hash, signature, state root.
- [ ] **(B/C)** L1 validation parity: identical accept/reject on the full message corpus.
- [ ] L2 multi-node scenarios green across repeated runs (consensus, sync, crash/recovery,
      rotation, cross-shard, partition+heal).
- [ ] L3 production-like testnet soak passed: block production, round count, commit latency, zero
      candidate-attributable rejections, candidate proposes & is voted in.
- [ ] Cross-DC RTT measured and within timing budget with margin; multi-day soak from the real DC.
- [ ] Partition / failover drill from the new DC passed; NTP/clock-sync verified.
- [ ] Bootstrap/direct-peer config and firewall/QUIC reachability confirmed from the new path.
- [ ] Testnet read-node ran clean (zero divergence) over the observation window.
- [ ] Key custody attested (HSM / secret management; no key reuse; equivocation-safe signer).
- [ ] Monitoring & alerting wired (block height lag, round count, rejection counts, peer/mesh
      health).

> - [ ] Rollback validator-set entry pre-staged and reviewed.

Reviewer 2: as mentioned above
```suggestion
```

Author: Removed in f52ee60 (the rollback checklist item is now a lighter "removal procedure understood and agreed with operators"; rollback itself is covered in the Rollout section).

- [ ] Per-shard `effective_at` schedule agreed with all existing operators.

## Risks & open questions

> - **Flaky validator-add test.** `test_validator_set_rotation` currently relies on the *remove* path

Reviewer 2: seems to be leaning on this pretty heavily

Author: Agreed — reframed in f52ee60. The open question no longer leans on CI flakiness; it now states the underlying point: the validator *add* path has thinner end-to-end coverage than *remove*, and strengthening it is a prerequisite.

  because the *add* path is racy in CI (new-validator discovery timing). Onboarding fundamentally
  exercises the add path, so hardening it is a prerequisite, not a nicety.
- **No Byzantine / equivocation fault-injection harness** exists today. Should one be **required**

>   for Tier C before a from-scratch client can vote on mainnet?

Reviewer 2: this is a good idea

Author: Left as an open discussion question for the forum.

- **Cross-geo latency vs. timing params.** If a desirable geo can't fit the current budget, do we
  revisit `propose_time` / `prevote_time` / `block_time` — a coordinated, all-node change with its

>   own testing burden?

Reviewer 2: yeah probably

Author: Left as an open discussion question for the forum.

> - **No formal property-based / fuzz testing of the codec.** A fuzz/property suite over the protobuf

Reviewer 2: definitely a prereq but actually achievable with LLMs now

Author: Updated in f52ee60 to call codec fuzz/property testing an effective Tier C prerequisite that is now tractable to author.
